Based on the story &
screenplay by Satyajit Ray
Presented by NFDC and Doordarshan
Cast : Soumitra Chatterjee,
Sadhu Meher, Shubhalakshmi Munshi.
Bina, Meenakshi Goswami,
Debotosh Ghosh,
Masood Akhtar, Bimal Deb.
Pallabi Ray, Ramesh Mukherjee,
Ashish Mukherjee, Nemai Ghosh.
Pratyush Bannerjee, Samar Sen.
Guest Appearance : Subhendu Chatterjee,
Lily Chakraborty.
Camera : Barun Raha.
Art Direction : Ashok Bose.
Editing : Dulal Dutta.
Sound Recording : Sujit Sarkar.
Make Up : Ananta Das.
Costumes : Lalita Ray.
Production Controller : Anil Chowdhuri.
Executive Producer :
Debasish Majumdar, Ravi Malik.
Production And World
Rights : NFDC & DOORDARSHAN.
Music And Direction : SANDIP RAY.
THE BROKEN JOURNEY.
How many times will
you read your own speech?
Your tea is getting cold.
Just going over it once-
in case I've missed out something.
What's your topic?
The progress in medicine
in the past two decades.
Now-a-days, mainly
three diseases are fatal-
cancer, heart attack or stroke.
On all three fronts
research is going on.
At some point people have to die, Mili.
If population goes on
increasing at this rate
We may feel sympathy-
for the victims of flood and drought-
but in a country like ours-
these are nature's own ways to keep-
the population in check.
Had family planning programme-
been effective in rural India-
it would have been a different story.
Strange contradiction !
On one hand the fight is
on to reduce the population.
On the other hand,
to eradicate diseases.
To increase human longevity.
- I have a request. - What?
Chumki is going to college now.
She'll come down in a moment-
will you have a word with her ?
Do you really believe that-
she's involved with
those undesirable elements
You don't have time to observe her.
You're out on calls from ten to ten.
She has changed a
lot in these two years.
She was never so rude
and an introvert before.
And her college has a bad reputation
I was totally unaware of the fact.
It was Khitish who told me
all about it in the club.
I request you to have a talk with her.
If she's really involved in all this,
such pep talk won't help.
You have no idea how
reckless and obstinate they can be.
Will you be back late again ?
Don't know.
Chumki?
What?
Sit down.
What do you mean?
You don't understand?
Come and sit down.
- I'll get late. - No,
you won't. Sit down.
I've to talk to you.
Certain unpleasant things
have come to my knowledge.
Have some students in
your college taken to drugs?
- Other colleges too.
I am not concerned with other colleges.
I want to know just one thing.
Do you take drugs?
Do you?
Listen -
Drugs are hundred times
more harmful than this.
Even your doctor
father won't be able to-
take you out from the clutches of drugs.
Just keep it in mind.
I'm going.
Chumki.
Just come here.
Hey, Chumki. What is wrong with you?
We are already late.
Hi. You are late.
Finished dressing up
at last. That is slow.
Look who is talking.
What do you think of her behaviour?
I didn't get any proof-
that she's taken to drugs.
College girls now-a-days-
are very independent spirited.
You can't prove anything
by cross questioning them.
I get my proof-
when I see my daughter
changing in front of my eyes.
You are busy with your
high society patients.
I have to suffer the
humiliation all the time.
Hello. Yes, yes.
Please hold on, I'll call him.
Jamshedpur.
Jamshedpur? Is the seminar cancelled?
Hello.
- It's me, Nikhil. - Who?
Nikhil. Nikhil.
Hearing your voice after ten
years ! But you used to be in Bombay.
Since ' 87 we're here.
I see.
You have a talk here tomorrow.
Yes. A Rotary Club talk.
Silly joke. You are aware.
Travelling by train or car ?
By car. Early tomorrow morning.
- And returning? - Day
after tomorrow morning.
Impossible!
What do you mean?
You'll have to come today. not tomorrow.
Since you are coming by car,
there's no problem.
If you start after lunch,
you'll reach by late evening.
You'll spend the night here.
Tomorrow's Sunday.
We'll gossip the whole day.
But-
No more 'but's.
Before leaving Bombay I had told you-
that I was going to Jameshedpur,
and you forgot all about it ?
Our friendship is thirty years old.
I was a witness to your
marriage and you to mine.
I remember everything.
What you don't know is-
by the grace of God I
have a roaring practice now.
If you give the excuse of your patients,
I'll start abusing you.
You finish with the urgent cases now.
That's O.K. So it's fixed.
Take down my address and phone number.
- Wait.
Yes, tell me.
15, Parth Road. - 15, Parth Road.
25052.
Right.
So, we'll be expecting you this evening.
Bring your " emergency kit " along.
- Why ?
A colleague of mine is
suffering from dreadful asthma.
You may give him a check up. -O.K.
Bye.
- See you.
What's the matter?
- Scandalous !
I had totally forgotten that
Nikhil stays in Jamshedpur.
That means you'll have to leave today?
What else can I do ?
I'll finish off a few : "calls".
Cancel all appointments at the clinic.
Have my lunch and start off.
It's a seven hours' drive. Goodbye.
Good morning.
I wonder why I feel fit
just by looking at you.
So I needn't examine you.
Just show my face.
No, your Smiling face.
Understand?
No madam, you're taking
your illness too lightly.
As a doctor, I can't allow that.
I must examine you.
Some coffee?
No ...
... I'm in a bit of a hurry.
Now-a-days, you're always in a hurry.
You're right.
My practice is growing!
Forget all your other patients.
Why can't I be your only patient?
So you'll bear all our expenses?
Why, am I not capable of it?
Of course, you are
wife of a millionaire;
Only daughter of a multi millionaire.
Now tell me how I am.
As long as you're involved
with your womens' council,
you won't be fully fit.
I know what goes on in those meetings.
As long as your plans to
beautify Calcutta are on-
you'll be careless.
You'll smoke, get
excited in arguements ...
You know,
we can launch our
project with three lakh rupees.
And Mrs. Lakhotia has
promised us the money.
Still, you'll have to give
up all that for a few days.
Stay at home and take
your medicines regularly.
And read some story books.
Not these fashion magazines.
Read good literature
- Tagore, Sarat Chandra.
Or Ramkrishna Kathamrita.
I've read Tagore.
When?
- In my college days.
- What have you read?
"- Shesher Kabita."
He hadn't a clue about modern,
sophisticated girls.
Then you live with your high pressure.
You're going?
- I'm in a hurry.
Today I didn't see
you smiling even once.
Let's keep it for my next visit.
I am leaving.
Good morning.
Morning.
So, how are you?
The doctor says I'm fine.
That's good. My opinion in
heart cases is valueless.
Valueless? Don't be silly.
One doesn't often come
across G.Ps of your caliber.
Oh, by the way -
I'm not coming tomorrow.
I'll see you the day after.
Why?
What is the matter?
Jamshedpur.
Going there to lecture to
the Rotary Club members.
Really ?
Advances in medical research
over the last twenty years.
I hope you'll mention
who are actually reaping the
benefits of this progress.
Who else?
Mankind.
Do you know the price of the
injection that saved my life?
Three and a half thousand.
Three thousand and five hundred rupees..
.. just one injection.
Forget about the poor.
Middle class patients
too can't afford it.
I could afford it, because my
company bore all the expenses.
Poor villagers don't
usually suffer from strokes-
and heart attacks.
That maybe so.
But they die of common
diseases for sheer lack of treatment.
You're involved only
with the urban high society.
Your patients say "
Ouch " when they get hurt.
Although today I have a big job,
I haven't lost all my idealism.
I was once a follower of Vivekananda.
The kind of qualification you have -
you could have done a lot for the poor -
with a little sacrifice.
Then today you would have been
decorated with a :Padmabhushan."
I don't want those titles.
I'm fine.
At my age a person can't
suddenly become philanthropic.
You have to be born with it.
The govt will look after the poor.
Some good things have been
done for them, I'm told.
Anyway.
I am leaving today.
We will meet day after. Take care.
What happened?
Is it a puncture?
Sir, it'll take five minutes.
I'll change the tyre.
Hey!
What's wrong with you?
Ready, sir.
What is your name?
Sir, I'm dying. Save me.
But what happened to you?
I'm under the spell.
Like last time.
In the same way.
Oh my God.
Under the spell?
It's torturing me.
In which village do you stay?
- Ko-"Kodali". - Is it close by?
Listen.
You take the car and go
towards those villages.
One of them must be "Kodali"
Tell the villagers that somebody-
from their village is seriously ill -
and lying by the way side.
He is in bad condition. - I see.
They should come
immediately and take him home.
Bring at least four of them by your car.
Now go.
Listen.
Can you hear me?
How did you come here?
Where had you gone?
To the market place?
The market place.
Had you come down here to urinate?
Yes.
Was it today?
Thursday.
Thursday !
And today's Saturday.
You've been lying here
for the past two days !
Tell me.
Save me !
Please come with me.
It's Hala ! Has he been drinking again ?
Do you all know him?
His name is Holadhar,
sir. He's from my village.
Hola,
Hey, Hola.
what's wrong with you?
Listen, I'm a doctor, and
let me tell you, he's very ill.
He was lying here for two days.
Didn't you notice that he was missing?
He often absconds for two, three days.
How would we know that
this time he was taken ill ?
He's quite a vagabond.
Doesn't he do any farming?
- Yes, he has some land.
The harvesting is just over.
And he's already started blowing
up his earnings in drugs and booze.
Is there a doctor nearby?
Yes.
Mr. Sanyal of our village is a Kaviraj.
And in the next
village there's Dr. Nakul.
May I say something?
Yes.
My name is Jatin Kundu.
I'm a primary school
teacher in a village here.
What would you like to say?
You're a doctor, aren't you?
- Yes.
Could you possibly stay back?
No.
I have an important work in Jamshedpur.
It'll take three
more hours to get there.
I suggest, the village chiefs be called.
It's their job to organize-
taking critical patients
to the town for treatment.
That's a good idea.
- You carry on doctor.
We'll do the needful.
I'm a little keen to
know what you'll do.
Then let me tell you frankly.
Five years ago, when
Haladhar had the same disease,
medicines didn't work.
And how would they ? He was possessed.
What are you saying?
- Believe me.
He was cured by an exorcist.
We'll call him again this time.
Village chiefs don't bother about us.
You go your own way,
we'll take care of him.
Anyway -
You decide what's best for him.
But do something fast.
His condition is critical.
If he continues to be
exposed to the cold,
It'll be difficult to save him.
I'll make a move.
All of you give a hand.
Come on. - Come on. Let us pick him up.
Come on. - Come on. Let us pick him.
Yes. Come on. Loknath. - Come on.
Come and give us a hand.
Perhaps the fellow would have
been saved by your treatment.
Now he has no chance of recovering.
I've seen in my childhood,
in my village.
The antics of an exorcist.
It can make a fit man sick.
He beats the patient hard with a broom.
For a moment I had
thought that you'll stay back.
But then I thought that-
you don't have the
experience of working in a village.
You took the right decision.
Santosh !
Turn the car. I'll go to "Kodal"
Where is his house?
No idea, Sir.
I had picked them up
from near that tree.
Maybe we will get it
if we go a little ahead.
Get my bag.
- Yes, sir.
Elephants roaring Horses neighing
The bugles sound a war cry
Soldiers marching Chariotiers shouting
King Ravana glittering in his Valour.
Silken flag flying high
It's golden glow driving away the night.
Will you go or not ?
I'll drive you away !
I will not spare you.
Go away.
What do you want?
What do you want? Tell me.
I will not spare you.
I will make you flee.
I won't leave you till
you quit the village !
I objected to all this. Nobody listened.
Stop it..! Stop the madness.
Stop it at once !
Take him indoors immediately !
If the torture continues,
he can't be saved.
What happened?
You heard what the doctor said.
Take him indoors immediately !
Come on. Make it quick.
Come on, Jharna. Go. Come on, Kushto.
Hold him by the waist.
All of you please go home.
There's nothing to see here.
Get going, all of you. There is
nothing to watch here anymore.
Go away. All of you, go home.
Come on. Come on.
Listen !
How much do you charge
for this mumbo-jumbo?
Give whatever pleases you.
Take this and push off !
Take the pillow
Please let me pass. Move.
Don't crowd a patient's room.
Those who've no work, please leave
Come on. Loknath. Kushto.
Yes, let us go. - Come on. Let us go.
Hey, even you can leave. - Come on.
Who are you ?
She's Haladhar's daughter.
- Where's her mother? - She's dead.
And this is her brother?
That's right. Raju.
What's your name?
Manashi.
Listen carefully.
Your father hasn't eaten for two days.
He must be given something to eat.
- Sabu ? - D'you have it?
- Yes. -Then mix it with milk and give.
And then give him sugar
solution at intervals.
Do you have sugar?
Sir.
Now I'll examine your father.
Okay.
Prepare an injection.
Delaphilinil. Decadrum.
You must have heard...
...that I found your
father by the wayside-
and arranged to bring him home.
I have some work in Jamshedpur.
It'll take me three
hours to reach there-
so I must go.
Before leaving I'll give
your father an injection.
Do you understand ' Injection'?
Yes.
It will relieve him
of the breathlessness.
He'll need other medicines too.
I won't have the time to give those.
Jatinbabu will call a doctor.
He'll take care of it.
- Understood? - Understood
Now go and bring the milk and Sabu.
Let's wait for 15 minutes.
You may go now.
But leave the bag and the torch behind.
- O.K., Sir.
Looks like pneumonia. Doesn't it ?
How did you know ?
My mother died of the same disease.
Had called a doctor from "Ghatshila",
...but it was no use.
You mentioned about a doctor nearby
- how's he?
More of an amateur.
As far as health is concerned,
here we're left entirely
on the mercy of God.
Hasn't the govt set up
a health centre here?
We've only heard of such
things Haven't seen one ourselves.
These villages haven't
even been electrified.
Will the fellow survive?
- This night is critical for him.
Proper medicines haven't been given.
You said you have some medicines.
Yes, some antibiotics. But
those are strong medicines
Have to be given at fixed hours.
Will the girl be able to manage?
I can take that responsibility.
Let's see.
We're hearing of this new disease
- aids.
Is there a cure for it?
It's a terrible and dangerous disease.
Research is going on.
But will you understand the details?
True !
But still I feel inquisitive.
I teach maths and history.
But my interest is varied.
No library around to supply good books.
So newspaper is my only
source of information.
Let's go back to the patient.
You really can't stay back?
No.
I don't have the temperament
of treating rural patients.
He seems to have improved a little.
I had expected it.
But where's the girl?
Listen !
Did you feed him ?
So, I'll go now.
I'm cooking your dinner.
You did so much for my father
Have dinner here before you go.
But I'm in a hurry.
It'll take only half an hour.
You've put me in a fix.
Please.
Have dinner here.
It'll be a sin for us if you don't.
Such sentiments are obsolete
Not in a village.
Is there a telephone nearby?
- Yes, at the Chowdhuri's.
How far is it?
Half an hour by car.
Alright, you keep the dinner ready.
Meanwhile I'll go and ring up my friend.
Let's go, Jatinbabu.
You'll reach your destination by 11 P.M.
Come in.
I had only read about your
traditional hospitality.
Today I witnessed it.
Manashi !
Hey Manashi !
You've again come to harass me ?
I came to give you a good news.
I've got a job.
At the rice mill.
What's that to me ?
Why !
Now I can take you away.
We'll elope.
Never say something like that again !
Your father is ill.
Your brother is at your father's side?
Don't you dare enter the house.
You're all alone !
What do you want?
I can't sleep well without meeting you.
So, you won't come with me ?
I'll take you away by force.
I can't live without you !
Get out !
What are you doing?
Get out of here !
Get out. I am warning you.
I will kill you.
Acting smart? Get out.
Sister !
It's alright. You go to father.
Listen.
I've got stuck with a patient on my way.
Ofcourse, I'm coming.
I'll reach by 11 PM.
Yes, I'll put up with you.
There won't be much
time for gossiping today.
Tomorrow we'll sit and talk.
Yes, yes. I am saying it again.
I am extremely sorry.
I'll come and explain.
Bye for now.
Fine.
Okay.
Raju, how's your dad?
Sleeping.
He had opened his eyes once.
Who's there?
Is that you, Jatin ?
Yes, Mr. Sanyal Please come.
Nobody informed me
about Haladhar's condition.
No, I mean..
I heard people discussing.
What a shame !
Last time
This is Dr. Sengupta.
He found Haladhar by the way side.
You're from Calcutta?
Yes.
Allopath?
Yes, sir.
- How many degrees after
your name? - Just a few.
Have you diagnosed the disease?
Looks like pneumonia.
Has he taken medicines?
I've given an injection
for the breathlessness.
It seems to have helped him.
How d'you find him?
He was lying in the open for two days.
Let's see his pulse.
You're wasting your time here.
Don't stay back to
suffer the mosquito bites.
No medicine can cure him now.
I'll leave for Jamshedpur soon.
Then go there; proceed.
I'll also make a move.
Let us go.
Mr. Khagen.
Let it be. Let it be. You
needn't act now. I am leaving.
Your dinner is ready.
You too join us for dinner.
No dear, I don't dine so early.
He's getting late. Serve him dinner.
Raju is here. I'll
join you after some time.
All right.
See you.
You're not used to this kind of food.
It's delicious.
Though I can't always
make out what I'm eating.
Shall I name the items?
No. A dish qualifies by
its taste, not its name.
You must be having a cook at home.
Yes, we do ...
But my wife also cooks.
How many children do you have?
One son, one daughter.
Son is the elder one. He's abroad.
Daughter studies in a college.
She's of your age.
Don't give much.
Enough. Enough.
Will you tell frankly?
- What?
How d'you find father?
What do you feel?
Me? I'm ill fated.
I've lost my mother, husband.
And now ...
How did your mother die?
Of Malaria.
A severe type.
I feel a shiver down my spine-
whenever I think of that day.
Dad was absconding as usual-
Raju was a babe.
Mother died in front of my eyes.
I cried uncontrollably.
Where do so much tears come from ?
At last I realized-
I've to take mother's place.
I pulled myself together,
and wiped off my tears.
I haven't cried since then.
And your husband?
He expired within a
year of our marriage.
How did he die?
He was bitten by a snake
- a Cobra.
What are you thinking?
About you.
About me?
Do you know that a 'nurse' means?
Nurse?
They work in hospitals,
look after patients.
Yes.
I think, with some training
you'll make a very good nurse.
How does one become a nurse?
One has to study.
Then you pass an exam.
Take admission in a
hospital and get the training.
I used to go to a primary school.
I can read Bengali.
And write a little.
After mother died,
I had to give up studies.
You'll again resume studies.
So what, if you're a little old.
Do nurses earn a salary?
Ofcourse !
It feels good even to think about it.
But how's all this possible?
Listen.
You'll look after your father
as long as he's alive.
When he's no more-
I'll take both of you to Calcutta.
I'll arrange for your studies.
Only after I see you
in a nurse's uniform,
I'll be at peace.
You're going away.
Will you remember us when you're away?
I will.
Today's experience has
been a unique one for me.
I can never forget you all.
I'll take your address-
I'll write to you after ten days-
Then I'll take a decision.
What is it?
Okay.
Let it be. That is enough.
What about your dinner?
I'll serve Raju first.
Raju.
Coming.
- You had gone home? - Take this.
Thermometer.
You didn't cheek his
temperature even once.
So I realized that you
don't have a thermometer.
Manashi, hold your
father's hand tightly.
You keep it with Manasi.
I'll collect it later.
You take it back. I'll go now.
Stay a little longer.
I have a feeling,
whatever happens will happen tonight.
Why don't you call-
some neighbour over to spend the night?
Nobody likes my father.
Please don't make any
more request to me, Manashi.
I did what I could.
You must try to understand.
I can stay the night.
Then I'll have to go home and tell them.
Let it be.
I'll manage. You've already done a lot.
If there's a crisis, I'll send for you.
I could have halted
here on my return trip-
but I have a lot of
work pending at Calcutta.
Then give me the medicine.
You have it, don't you?
It's not easy to
administer that medicine.
If you show me, I'll do it.
Come here.
Do you see how they are packed?
You press from above
and they'll come out.
Give me.
Is it all right ?
Yes.
There are eight capsules.
Give one every four hours.
Make him swallow it with water.
There are enough for tomorrow.
Shall I give him one now?
- Yes.
Dad.
Dad, open your mouth.
You've to take a pill.
Please open your mouth.
Now swallow it.
So I'll make a move now.
All right
Will the medicine help?
His condition detoriorated...
...during those two unattended days.
If you could stay a little longer !
That's out of question;
I've already told you.
I enjoyed your company.
So did I.
I am leaving.
Greetings.
The Sun has set
A soft twilight glow fills the sky
As the white water lilies bloom,
The lotus closes its eye
The birds return to their nests
And cows to their sheds
The first star twinkles in the sky.
So, you forgot
completely that we're here !
It slips out of one's mind.
We've not met for 10 years !
So, you were held up.
Have you started
practising in the village ?
As far as I know you,
you are fiercely urban.
Never had these idealisms.
I still don't have.
But this time, I couldn't turn my back.
The tyre was punctured.
I saw a farmer lying by the side
His condition was critical.
He could hardly breathe.
I couldn't leave him unattended.
You attend to the highest classes.
You can't afford to attend to farmers.
What are you saying ?!
He's an urban doctor doesn't mean-
that he's devoid of feelings.
Everybody feels sorry for the poor.
You know, Nikhil is not wrong.
I am city born and city bred.
I can't stand village life.
But I don't know why.
On seeing the poor fellow-
I suddenly remembered-
the Hippocratic Oath we'd
taken during graduation.
What's that?
Well, medical students have-
to take some oaths during graduation.
It's a Greek tradition.
Whatsoever house I enter..
..there will I go for
the benefit of the sick.
Refraining from all wrong doing..
..and corruption.
Did the patient survive?
Don't know.
This night is very crucial.
Just because I had
promised you, I came away-
giving some medicines and
instructions to his daughter.
Who else is there?
His wife is dead, he has a young son,
and the daughter I told
you about she's widow-
She's about seventeen ... remarkable.
Why?
Why remarkable?
I was comparing her with my daughter.
If I hadn't given you word,
I would have stayed back.
Nonsense.
Doctors shouldn't have such sentiments.
Daily thousands are dying
for lack of medical care.
What can you do alone?
That is why, I'm practising in the city.
Right.
And that is the end of the argument.
It's past midnight. Let's go to bed.
Give me your glass.
Do you take bed tea?
No, I'll directly take breakfast.
Both of us will go for your talk.
Sure.
You are most welcome.
Shall we sleep now? Good night.
Good night. - Good night.
Daddy, swallow the pill.
While the kingdom of demons celebrates
Sita pines for her dear one
All alone in the Ashoka woods,
Her guards desert her
to join the merrymaking.
Dear Nikhil.
I haven't done a
really good deed in my life.
Today I have found an
opportunity to do one.
I'll be back by 10 AM tomorrow
- Neehar.
Manashi.
Doctor. You?
I had dozed off.
Father..
Be strong, Manashi
I know, I know.
I know.
Will you be able to
make all arrangements ?
Yes
Then I'll go.
I'll write to you.
We've given you so much trouble
Trouble !
I can't explain to you-
what I've gained in this one day.
Farewell, little nurse?
Video Subtitled at: NFDC Ltd.-Chennai.
Subtitles by : Subha Das Mollick.